Maori elderwoman Rose Pere brings people to their knees
and to their feet in applause when she speaks her truth.
She has been bestowed many honors
from cultures around the world,
including from the Queen of England
and as an awe-inspiring representative
of the indigenous people of New Zealand.
It has been her life's mission to preserve
and perpetuate the wisdom of the Maori way
and their uniquely respectful relationship
to all living things.
One trait that she says is prized among their people
is their historical ability to use sight and intuition
to navigate through life.
I listened to you this morning and I found it
absolutely amazing that here this,
what are you, maybe five feet tall,
this woman stands up before this group,
not even on the stage and scared
the begeezus out of everybody.
(laughter)
What is it that people are so afraid of hearing
one woman speak her complete truth?
Well I guess it depends on what the one's
cultural background is.
For us, the Maori, we are a warrior race of people.
And we stand up and we make sure that people
understand and know exactly what we are all about.
We do not pretend to be anything else but ourselves
because for us, we are miracles in expression.
We have both the divine in us as well as
the beautiful human side of us.
And so when I stand up, I stand up,
and I stand up tall.
Boy do you, and it actually,
I noticed myself and other people in the room,
just your doing that, something permeated the room
that actually brings tears to our eyes
because we're so afraid of standing up
and being who we are, myself included.
No we're not.
For us, we're fearless people.
We only can afford to have fear for 20 seconds.
After that, you must have complete control
over your situation, and it doesn't matter
what sort of situation you find yourself in.
You have to be fearless.
You also need to understand that the Maori,
we are the fastest ghostbusters on the planet.
(laughter)
Interesting.
And other people ask us to clear negative energy,
we're the fastest at doing that,
and that is because we don't waste time meditating.
We don't waste time praying because we're
gods and goddesses anyway, and we go straight into it.
So do you just, you just
We attack the energy and we tell it to go, finished.
There's no nonsense.
And there's also an element,
even though you don't go into meditation,
with yourself, for example, you're also a seer.
That's right.
And so how does this element
come into the people, the Maori people?
When you say a seer, for us it's just natural.
It is natural for us to have a second sight.
It is natural for us to have intuitive intelligence
at a very high level.
King Farouk, during the second world war,
got the Maori battalion to guard his palace
because he maintained that we had intuitive intelligence
at a very high level,
that his own people had lost it.
And that's what I'm talking about.
The whole of humanity has this,
but it's being repressed in some cultures.
It has been repressed, and when you think about
17 million women being exterminated at the stake
during the Inquisition, it is no wonder
some people are fearful.
I see this.
But not for us, the Maori, no.
This is very true.
I see this in a lot of powerful women.
I've interviewed many powerful women,
but even inside, there's still this remnant of fear
that if you come out and say what you really mean
and be really who you truly are,
that there's some repercussion.
Well I'm telling you that I can only afford
to have fear for 20 seconds.
After that, it's either you or me mate,
and it's not going to be me.
(laughter)
I can tell it's not going to be you.
Let's talk about what happened to your people
in your own life when the missionaries came
with all their great knowledge.
God bless them.
God bless them, you know?
When the Europeans first came down to us,
we knew that a lot of them came from the part
of our mother that is the heart chakra.
Therefore, we embraced them.
They assumed that they were talking about S-U-N, Rah.
The other thing is that they realized that the missionaries
were not speaking about the divine mother.
They only spoke about the Father, the child, or the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.
So our people have hidden mother energy
from the missionaries, we project a Christian
or Roman Catholic image, whatever up front,
but we practice our own religion, rituals.
And that is how we have been able to retain
our own power and our own energy
because we've kept people off the ancient path
that we have trodden, that has special signposts.
What was your own experience
starting at a young age when they came?
How did this impact your life?
Well the first thing I struck with western thinking
was that there was no respect for our family
such as the animals.
They spoke about filthy pigs.
We would never describe an animal as being filthy, ever.
They spoke about terrible days.
We don't know what that means.
Every day is perfect.
Every day is precious.
For us, the miracle is called "hatinotanga"
which means an absolute treasure.
So that if someone comes to join you at the table,
like a bee or a fly, that in itself is an absolute treasure.
Therefore, that is a miracle.
That's how we see it.
We do not separate ourselves from the oneness
of everything that exists.
We are lucky to be here under the trees.
I'm so pleased because they are very special
relations to us.
They have done breathing for so long for humanity,
and do we appreciate it?
No, we cut down huge forests, huge forests.
How can we do that?
How can we be so stupid?
I don't know.
In my world, we have care of all the birds.
We replenish the bird numbers by
keeping down the snakes and weasels,
which were introduced into our country.
We replenish, and we also regenerate.
Okay, hold on, a little mite.
A little insect coming to visit.
That's right.
Uh "kiorakuay".
We also, it doesn't matter what we're talking about.
We are one with the universe.
We are one with everything that exists.
And so we take good care of people,
but certainly everything else that we have
because we're all related.
What is your personal lineage
within all of this, with your ancestors,
and your place in society now?
My lineage, I come from ancient lines.
I can go back over 220 generations,
back to when ancient Hawaiki was one whole continent
which is over 12,000 years ago.
We have idiots who have said how can you do that?
I said we can, and that is what you need to realize,
that the Maori were well known for being able
to trace our ancestry back.
We are one of the few peoples in the world who can do that.
We can recite 5,000 names off.
How many people can do that?
So I come from an ancient line of people.
A people who have always linked in with
the central sun, the divine spot.
A people who have always seen the divine in ourselves,
and that's how we see other people.
We see other people as all esteemed.
It doesn't matter what culture they come from,
what country they come from.
We see them as all esteemed people as the living breath
from the central sun, the divine spot.
Our word Ra, ranatira, ordinary meaning is team person.
Sacred meaning Ra, we begin with the sun,
nati, living breath, and we end with Ra.
Ranatira.
That's how we are.
A very ancient people.
So when our aboriginal brothers and sisters
say to us they are the most ancient of the peoples,
we say to them hush, hush, we are all ancient beings.
I will say to you, my aboriginal brothers and sisters,
I chose to be an Aborigine before the white man came.
And not to harp, not to belabor the point,
but when the white man did come,
how, in your own personal experience,
your family's experience, your people's experience,
how did this affect your lives?
We, the Maori, didn't put up with any nonsense.
For me and our family, we've always withstood any,
and so there's a great respect for us as a people.
Our white brothers and sisters love us.
We can squabble.
We can bicker, but at the end of the day,
we are one family with unique members within the family.
So it's not as if they can trick, no they don't do that.
You know that the Maori, our language is the
official language of New Zealand.
That's amazing, wonderful.
Where else would you get that?
So what does it tell people?
It tells people that as a race of people,
we have never, people have never been able to swallow us up.
No because we've always protected our own interests.
The other thing is that we can see a lot more
than what people think.
And so for us, people who have chosen to be
white New Zealanders today, they are special people
because they've chosen to come in at the right time.
Why do you say the right time?
Because of the mother energy coming back in full force.
All the portals have opened up in terms of mother energy.
I will say to pakeha New Zealanders, white New Zealanders.
you have chosen the right time to come back in
as a New Zealander.
You come to, here we're in Boulder, Colorado,
at an energy healing conference and you are probably
the most esteemed guest here at the invitation
of the organizers.
You receive a standing ovation each time you speak.
You bring a power that people aren't accustomed
to being around personally, a personal power.
You bring this to us, but I would like to know also
well, two things, first how do you experience it
when you come in to the United States,
into this kind of space and land and people,
with everything, no holds barred.
What happens to you?
What do you feel?
I must say that when I came in,
on a spiritual level, I was embraced by the eagle.
I was embraced by the first nations people of this land.
That, well it enables me, and it reinforces
the reason why I'm here,
which is to remind people that we're all divine beings,
that no one is more superior or more divine than another,
and that it is time for us to remember how important it is
to love each other unconditionally,
and not to come in with powertization and control
over food, fuel, and water.
No, not only that.
People in the United States need to link in to our mother,
(Maori term)
because we all have that energy within us.
We had to remember how to do it sometimes,
how to touch her.
We massage her when we do posture dances.
when we stand on her (Maori chant),
but we're massaging her with our feet, not with sprigs.
Beautiful.
But massaging her with our bare feet, for our mother.
And she feeds us through our feet.
Of course she does.
And we link into her as our mother.
That's on a physical level.
On a spiritual level, we have a divine mother,
and I'm not speaking about Mary.
I'm speaking about divine mother from
the central sun, divine spot.
What is your observation when you look at,
when you say I'm not speaking of Mary,
I'm speaking of our divine mother, our sustenance,
as you look around the world with your vision,
what do you see the formal religions having
contributed to our planet?
Well religions, look at the battles for goodness sake,
and a lot of them are religious battles.
And it's very sad.
All I can feel for other families across the world.
I have said to our brothers and sisters in Israel,
you, the Palestinians, and the Israelis,
you both come from Abraham, what's going on here?
You see, our people, we do not have a word for enemy.
The closest we have to that word is "hehoalidi",
which means quarrelsome friend, but only for a time.
So that was the Germans and we fought
against them in two world wars.
They are still family.
And when our retired servicemen go across
overseas, to cry over sometimes the dead
that we have left in Europe, in Galipoli,
they also cry for the German dead,
and they remember the mothers of those soldiers.
When I went on a nature tour through Germany,
look it was packed because they knew a Maori was coming.
We are a legend in the middle East, through Europe, Germany,
Italy, because the Maori has always been straight up.
What the Maori battalion said to the German army was
if you hear us doing our war dance,
you know, and if you got any guts,
you will know that we have run out of ammunition
and you should come in at us with your bayonets.
An understanding between two races of people.
So that for me, all we're trying to say is no, we are one.
The most important message.
We are one.
No question about it.
We have cultural cloaks that we celebrate and enjoy.
I respect all other cultures and I enjoy the patterns,
the designs, and the sharing, but I'm very proud
of the cultural cloak that I wear right now.
But on a spiritual level, we are all one, all of us.
So religion, what does that actually mean,
because for me, we are spirits having a physical journey.
And we link in, there's no question about it.
We are immortal.
We are immortal, you know, we don't die.
And in a sense, on a physical level,
there was a time back where someone in your situation
could have been facing their own mortality, so to speak.
This was many years ago, you had to deal with
your own internal challenge, having developed a brain tumor.
You say this was 20 years ago.
I had a brain tumor, that's right,
but I told you that I brought it on myself.
Right, and that's interesting.
Because I transgressed on a spiritual level.
Can you talk about that
so we can understand how you...
In my world, there's no such thing as disease or illness.
There is only cleansing, and you have to find out why
you have to have a particular type of cleansing.
So as I said, when I had the brain tumor,
I thought that's a big one Rose.
You've transgressed in a big way.
And you had better get it right.
Otherwise, you're not going to get rid of it.
And now you will go out and have to come back again.
So for me, there were two areas that I looked at.
Committing suicide in my previous life,
which I knew I did not do,
and the second one was arrogance.
It was the arrogance that bought me the brain tumor.
Once I worked that out, the goddess of the surgeons
saying that I had such a small chance, if any,
of getting through it, I just laughed
because in my world, we link in with eight dimensions.
That's why we have the symbol of the octopus.
And so for me, only one quarter of one
of those tentacles was having trouble.
The other seven and three quarters were at full power.
And so I could heal myself, but I had to have
a surgeon to take the tumor out.
I got that guidance.
So I held his hands.
I also held the hands of the Indian doctor
who had to do the anesthetics.
That's fine.
And in the Maori tradition,
we're at an energy healing conference.
In the Maori tradition, how would you go about
healing a member of your family or extended family?
Do you heal from within?
Is it self generated or do you assist each other in healing?
The people have the ability to heal themselves.
They had to believe that.
If I had listened to the surgeon,
as I said, I wouldn't have lived.
So what we're saying to people is look,
there is a lot more to you than having a medical doctor
tell you that you have a terminal cancer
or terminal disease.
The mind is very powerful.
If you believe that then you will die, no question about it.
But if you believe that you have learnt a lesson,
and you thank that entity, we call them entities,
for coming in, then you can move forward.
It's interesting because as you speak,
you have the effect on people of helping them understand,
on one hand how little we know,
but on another, what a vast amount of knowledge
we each possess, and it's that incongruency in the middle
there that somehow the western world needs to bridge.
Part of the problem with the western world is props,
so help me.
Is what?
Props.
You know, you gotta have props.
Look at the fact that you had a computer break down.
So help me all your United Airlines were out of commission.
That's unbelievable that a huge country like this
could move into chaos and turmoil
through the loss of computer energy.
I mean, it's just beyond me
because for me, we're tuned in.
We're tuned into the entire, all universes, all galaxies.
And so at home, we lead a very simple lifestyle.
We do not believe in too many props.
We believe that the greatest instrument is yourself
and that's where you start.
Not having a whole lot of props.
And I have noticed that some people
bless them, they come into our context
where life is very simple.
We do not have all the modern electrical appliances,
and they just had to get on with it.
Sometimes they had to use an open fire.
We had two white American men who came in
to tell us, the Maori, our family,
he wanted us to be able to preserve food for 30 years
and be able to handle famine and all this stuff.
Ah yeah, and they told us they were taught
by our brothers and sisters, the first nations people
from this country oh yeah.
One day, I got 50 visitors while they were with me,
and we had a power cut.
There was no electricity.
So I said to them well you two have told me
how practical, how you can handle things,
get on with it.
You have 50 people to cook for,
and we want lunch at one o'clock.
(laughter)
They were struggling even to get the fire going.
I would like to have seen that one.
And I said to them, we wouldn't dare insult the universe.
It's a universe of abundance.
We don't turn around and say well universe,
we can't trust you.
We had to preserve food for 30 years.
We're seasonal.
We work in with the seasons, and
we thank, we thank everything for the way it helps us out.
That's what I'm talking about.
The western world is too reliant.
Take away, what would happen here if we had your power cut?
What would happen to the states if we had
power cuts right through this country?
Everything stops.
And then what?
So in my world, no, we are still hunters.
And we still know how to survive in terms of
the natural world, the natural environment.
A moment ago, you were talking about
your connection with all things.
You were talking with galaxies beyond.
Do your people, do you communicate also
with beings that are from other galaxies?
We do, we do.
Can you talk a little bit about this?
We link into Sirius.
We link into the North Star.
Pleiades, I'm trying to remember the English names.
My first language is Maori.
Jupiter, Venus, Mars.
We link into all of those.
What do you hear these days or in this lifetime?
What is the information streaming through
from other places to us?
We're getting a lot of support from those other planets.
I can assure you of that.
In terms of trying to conserve what's left.
In terms of people remembering the oneness
and being able to link into that consciousness.
We have support, and that's how we work.
There's no limit, no limit whatsoever.
It seems that a lot of people
at this conference, this is a lot of previously known
knowledge that's being remembered
as much as being created or invented.
Are we getting assistance from other places
in helping us remember these technologies that exist?
Well we had a good session today with Freddy, is it?
Oh fabulous.
What he was talking about, well it's not new to us.
Even all the patterns, for us, mathematics is
the study of all possible patterns, including empty sets.
We can construct things without, in one place,
and then carry it to another and just set it all up.
Without any instruments.
What are some of your most sacred
geometrical forms that you work with in your culture,
for either healing or for remembering or communication?
Healing is, we work with the DNA in people.
The DNA, for us, is the blue and red,
and you've got spirals, haven't you?
Yes.
So we work with that because that is what
we have in common with the whole of humanity
is that our Maori word for a human being is "tanata".
The first part of the word, ta, stands for ta mocho,
which means the DNA.
The second part, na is the bris, from the source.
The last ta stands for taiya, which means I am a hologram.
So those patterns, and if you look at a lot of our patterns,
you can see, you know in my headgear,
you see even New Zealand has a coda pattern,
a shape like that for in front.
So for us, we are more than family.
If you look at meeting houses, communal houses,
you will see a lot of the patterns he was talking about.
You will see it, look at my sweet Addy,
he's sick and tired of all this.
Scuse me darling.
Oh no, you haven't got your belt.
His kind of a belt, it's woven.
It has a lot of the patterns that we saw today.
So for our people,
It's always been there.
we were being a literate people,
we were told we were illiterate,
and I've had to say to people,
do you know what literate really means?
Can you read nature?
Can you read what we say to you in the house?
No you can't.
We can work yours out just like this,
just knowing the patterns.
For me, I learned about the western world,
it was no problem.
I could do things just through my mind,
and run circles around the teachers
because the teachers were all white, most of them,
left brained, for God's sake.
We're whole brained for learning people.
We work with the whole brain.
We always have.
All our posture dances help us with whole brain learning.
So that we can move into the super consciousness.
So our teachers, if we wanted to please them,
we would move in on the left brain.
If we wanted to really get them raving mad,
we would move in on the right.
They couldn't handle it.
How did that express itself with them?
Well what does it tell the western world?
Get into gear.
Whole brain learning is a part of us.
Absolutely.
What is happening with the Maori today?
Who succeeds you?
You're from a long line of people who know and see.
Oh no, that won't be a problem, you know.
The traditions or...
No, it won't be a problem, it goes down in a way.
It's in the genes.
So it really doesn't matter if
the outside look changes?
It's still a part of you?
It's still, I mean no one in it,
most people in our country,
when I was in the department of education,
I had a very senior position.
None of them knew that I was a "tahuna",
wasn't their business, right?
But I knew their world and I knew it inside out.
And I'm one of the few people in New Zealand
who has represented our country
at conferences for teachers of English, internationally.
I've had my white brothers and sisters say,
for God's sake Rose, how come you're going?
And I said obviously my English is
completely superior to yours.
(laughter)
And it is my second language.
Rose, you've been bestowed a lot of honors.
I have.
I deserve them.
I deserve them for sure because it's been a hard job.
It has been a hard job working with left-brained people.
It really has.
Hard job.
I started in 1956, a group of us Maori people,
working with the system of New Zealand
in terms of education.
We finally got through by the year 1974,
and then Maori became accepted
as part and parcel of New Zealand.
If you can talk to mothers now
in the western world, you've seen how we raise our children.
You've seen what the education system is like.
You have a mother watching right now
with a little child, an infant.
What information can you pass on to them?
The child is a learner and a teacher.
The child comes in with insight,
everything from the other side.
By the time they're eight in the western world,
that's repressed in them.
You get parents that say to children,
yes I used to be like that darling.
I used to have little friends too.
The child knows about the little friends and can see them.
And so they're ridiculing to a certain extent.
Something that is a natural, vital part.
Patronizing them, yes.
And in New Zealand, we let our children go
because they learn from firsthand experience.
We also treat them as our equals.
We do not speak down.
The other thing is that we learn from them.
For example, I taught my grandparents' generation
how to rock and roll.
(laughter)
And they taught me the Charleston.
So I mean, in my culture, the generations learn
from each other and we have intergenerational teaching.
At home, our grandchildren live with us,
and our children, and we also have great grandchildren.
So that what we're transmitting,
we are the first teachers.
The grandparents are the first teachers in my culture
because the parents are busy making a living,
building up the economic base.
And we have all the patience in the world
with our grandchildren.
It seems so important because
here, the family has been so fragmented,
and it seems through sheer economic impetus alone,
it's going to be necessary for people
to begin coming back together again,
which I think is fabulous.
Why do we think we should toss our children out
at the age of 18 and we have our own little house,
each person has their own little house,
or individuals, their own little condiminium
separate from each other.
It doesn't make sense that we live like this.
That is a constant battle for us in New Zealand,
the Maori, because we're used to
family oriented situations and living,
and they are forever trying to separate the genders,
forever trying to separate the generations,
by trying to come across our entire way of thinking.
And I've said to our people, no, we can not afford
to follow in their footsteps because for us,
we have to remember that we link in to the cosmos,
that we link into, that there's no limit to our thinking,
and our children, they are treasures.
They are miracles.
"Hatinotanga", absolute treasures.
And so they have the right to be true to themselves.
They are not possessions.
They are divine beings that have a right
to be true to themselves.
(thunder)
Confirmation.
You see that?
The first thunder.
Yes, that is perfect.
You see that.
And every one of us has that right.
You see that we have that right.
My grandson, he's 27 and one of them,
he's driving me crazy, but it's not my journey,
it is his.
And I have to respect that.
You see, I'm one of those people that has spoken out
against genetic engineering, against in vitro fertilization,
and I remember someone saying that you know,
the sexual act can be so clumsy,
and I said oh is that right?
So you would prefer to have a woman
drinking wine in one room at the hospital
surrounded by parts that look like penises?
And then you have a man in another room
reading a Penthouse magazine and you dare say to me
that a natural relationship is clumsy?
(laughter)
And do you have Maori donor fathers?
Oh no, they didn't in New Zealand.
I said do you have Jewish donor fathers?
Nope.
I said that's very interesting.
So all of the donor fathers are Caucasian, are they?
Said, oh yes, well we have the IQ and all this and all that,
and I said oh is that right.
So if two people meet in the future,
they say I hope your donor father's not number 17
because that's mine, you know?
(laughter)
For me, a Maori, that believes in the sacredness
of the union of the mother and father energies,
and we are linked into that.
Joe and I, he is my right, I am his left.
That's just beyond...
And for me, in the Maori culture,
genealogy is important, not saying
number 17 is my donor father.
It is meant to say my mother is so-and-so,
that my father is so-and-so, then being able
to go back in with the generations.
Very important, our genealogy is important.
That's why I can sit here.
I can stand up with confidence because I know who I am.
I know from whence I came and I know where I'm going.
How many people know that?
Not many.
Not many in the west.
It is not enough to say go under father number 17,
IQ 160, no.
In fact you had a situation here in the States
where the donor father was ugly ass,
and a lot of the children ended up looking like that.
Well, right.
Well again, it's trying to put value
on all the externals instead of the whole.
And what I've found out, a lot of people,
the reason why they have that old,
they have to have a child is because
they see them as a possession.
Possession.
Just like a nice car.
Something else to round out the picture of life.
You see, we had lesbians who attended the conference
where I spoke out against in vitro fertilization.
And they said to me, these were Maori lesbians, okay?
They said well we really want children.
I said get on to your tribal brothers.
At least you will know their genealogy.
And it's happened.
I said don't go there.
Don't even consider it.
It is alien.
For example, Jesus, I saw him smash these tubes.
I said to him, the only time I ever read
about you losing your temper was in the temple.
It was his anger against in vitro fertilization.
Now people might say good God, who is this woman?
Too bad people.
I've seen Jesus and I know him.
The other thing is, he loves me for myself.
He has never told me to be any different.
Never.
All I know from him is love, unconditional love.
Not telling me to change or to be any different.
And so for me, when I have so-called Christians
who talk to me, I say to them,
do you really know what you're talking about?
Are you really practicing unconditional love?
Are you really promoting what Jesus was all about?
A challenge.
It is a challenge, and on the subject
of this about the judgement that we have of each other,
and putting on ourselves as well,
as I asked a moment ago for you to please speak
to a mother regarding a child,
what about the mother herself?
In the western world, in America in particular,
the women are so full of self-loathing
because maybe they age,
maybe they gain 10 or 20 or 30 pounds.
Oh look, we love ourselves, you see.
That's how we are.
We just love ourselves.
I said Joe's a lucky man because
he's got interests over the years with
me putting on weight, you know.
(laughter)
Interest in the bank.
Of course.
Now for us, we're perfect.
We don't want to be like anyone else.
And it's tragic when people think like that.
And say, oh, I mean that's alien to me
that people want to change themselves
to look like someone else.
I don't understand this sort of thinking.
For example, I had a pakeha woman
in New Zealand say to me in education,
Rose, you must never light your own cigarette.
You will lose 75% of your sex appeal,
and men, you know, all this.
I said who told you that rubbish?
You either have sex appeal or you don't.
I can assure you.
And one of the biggest occupational hazards I have
is keeping pakeha men the hell out of my space.
(laughter)
Why do they take to me?
Because I am true to myself.
And I've said this to pakeha women.
They fell in love with a woman who was true to herself.
What's happened to you?
You have followed the dictates of your society.
Where you're supposed to be behind your husband,
you're regarded as a subordinate.
When the missionaries came, they couldn't stand
the fact that we had women who were in
positions of sovereign power.
They couldn't.
And they couldn't handle women in terms of
having some say in control.
Yes, which brings me to
one of my last questions just because
I think we may be close to running out of tape here,
and that is, you've spoken to the child.
You've spoken to the woman.
What do you have to say to the men
because in the west, the men are as confused as the women
trying to be something they're not.
The men...
all of us are perfect.
We are beautiful beings.
For me, and if you have two people
from the same gender going together,
we don't, we have nothing to say about that.
As far as we're concerned, they're still part of our family.
And it's the same with men and women.
As far as we're concerned, we are one unit.
We go together.
We're having trouble in New Zealand
because I've had men wanting me to facilitate
conferences for them because they feel they've got sin
about the number of men that are in prisons,
the number of men that are in psych units,
and so we have to work on these things.
They are concerned about the violence in homes.
And so what we're doing is we're working on the liver
of men, going right back as long as humanity has existed
to heal the liver of men.
It doesn't matter what culture we're talking about.
In a woman, it's to heal the spleen
and also the sacred seed of power, which is the womb.
Now for Maori women, no, we are seen as
a very powerful energy.
The mother energy is very very important.
So is the father energy.
We don't compete with each other.
We complement each other,
and a lot of our native birds,
they stay with one partner for life.
And if one partner dies, the other one dies
because they work together,
and so for Joe and I, in terms of our marriage,
47 years, we liken ourselves to the birds.
They stay with the one partner
on the whole.
But it doesn't mean that we condemn other people
who may have had different partners.
That doesn't, in fact, a lot of people,
our solo mothers and fathers come to visit us
because they want their children to identify with the role,
the model that we are.
Well you've seen, some of you would have seen the fact
that there is no way that I could have done
my sharing yesterday without Joe.
He had to come on the stage.
That is how we are.
He's my esteemed partner.
I am his.
And so there for us, that's what we're trying to say
to our young people because they're getting
caught up in western thinking.
We're saying to them think very very carefully
because men, I said, you are sacred.
For example, you take vagina.
Vagina means a sheath for a sword,
so I said to Joe, in the western world,
they talk about a vagina.
I have a sheath for your sword Joe.
Now, in my world, we refer to that as tara.
Ta is the DNA, ra from the single sun, the divine spot.
So that the vagina is symbolic of
the single sun, the divine spot.
That's how divine the mother is.
Huge difference, huh?
Yes.
The men, for their testicles, raho.
Ho is the the vibration of the divine father,
from the single sun, the divine spot.
Sacred, sacred.
Our heads are sacred.
The genital region is sacred
for both men and women.
Both men and women.
What does it do to us as a people
when that may be exploited?
Well we all know that.
We know what happens.
Now for us, your whole body is sacred,
particularly your head and your genital region.
It's not the central station, it's a temple.
(laughter)
Sacred, absolutely sacred.
So that's what I have to say to the men.
No, you are sacred.
The penis, our word for that is uria.
It means the vibration of earth mother
and the vibration of the heavens.
That's what that links into.
What else can I say?
That's how we see our men.
And our men see us in the same way.
So much more at home.
We link into the divine spot.
Any final messages for everybody?
Not men, not women, not children, all of us.
All of us, we are one.
We are a beautiful family of people
right across the world.
All we have to do is to remember that.
And to celebrate all our different cultures
with our beautiful cloaks.
But on a spiritual level, we are one family.
We are all esteemed people.
Not one of us has more divine right than another,
and we all come from the central sun,
the divine spot.
(Maori words)
Much love.
Would you be okay with singing
your little song that you guided us through?
It's so sweet about, the little one at the end
of the last talk about our perfection,
about our being perfect.
Just a little song to finish.
The other thing is that we believe in
loving ourselves to the nth degree,
and so we see ourselves as perfect,
and one of the songs we always sing,
so that other people can understand
what we're trying to say is this one.
Oh Lord, it's hard to be humble
When you're perfect in every way
I can't wait to look in the mirror
I get better looking each day
To know me is to love me
I must be one beautiful being
Oh Lord it's hard to be humble
I'm doing the best that I can
(laughter)
Oh, on that note, I can't thank you enough,
and to know you is to love you.
Thank you.
I must say that I was somewhat intimidated
to sit with Rose as she has a way of looking
right through you, but in the end,
I felt as though I were basking in her warmth
and strength, and shared a beautiful moment
with she and her husband Joe
when they greeted me in the traditional Maori way
by pressing foreheads together in connection.
They then dubbed me an official Kiwi.
I treasure that brief time together.
Until next time, thanks for watching.